Send Logstash Metrics via OTLP (#18857)
elastic/logstash: docs/reference/monitoring-with-opentelemetry.md

| Metric name | Type | Unit | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `logstash.plugin.events.in` | Counter | `{event}` | Events received by plugin |
| `logstash.plugin.events.out` | Counter | `{event}` | Events output by plugin |
| `logstash.plugin.events.duration` | Counter | `ms` | Time spent processing events |

### Cgroup metrics (Linux only)

These metrics are available when running on Linux with cgroups enabled (e.g., in containers).

| Metric name | Type | Unit | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `logstash.os.cgroup.cpuacct.usage` | Counter | `ns` | Total CPU time consumed |
| `logstash.os.cgroup.cpu.cfs_period` | Gauge | `us` | CFS scheduling period |
| `logstash.os.cgroup.cpu.cfs_quota` | Gauge | `us` | CFS scheduling quota |
| `logstash.os.cgroup.cpu.stat.elapsed_periods` | Counter | `{period}` | Number of elapsed CFS periods |
| `logstash.os.cgroup.cpu.stat.nr_times_throttled` | Counter | `{occurrence}` | Number of times throttled |
| `logstash.os.cgroup.cpu.stat.time_throttled` | Counter | `ns` | Total time throttled |

## Resource attributes

The following resource attributes are automatically added to all metrics:

| Attribute | Description |
| --- | --- |

> | `service.name` | Always set to `logstash` |

Reviewer: Is this overridable?  I think users would want to set it, esp. in environments with different logstashes performing different function. For example `logstash-accounting-import`, `logstash-webservers`

Author: Updated in this commit https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18857/changes/b7a0bb436d8b6f53e41daf6759ebe6f418d21939
There is an OTel property `OTEL_SERVICE_NAME` that can be configured now.

Additional resource attributes can be added using the `otel.resource.attributes` setting.

## Viewing metrics in Kibana

When sending metrics to Elastic Cloud via the native OTLP endpoint, metrics are stored in APM data streams (`.ds-metrics-apm.app.logstash-*`). You can view them in:

1. **Observability > APM > Services** - Find your Logstash service
2. **Observability > Metrics Explorer** - Query metrics directly
3. **Discover** - Search the `metrics-apm.app.logstash-*` data view

When using an OpenTelemetry Collector with the Elasticsearch exporter, create a data view matching your configured index pattern (e.g., `metrics-otel-*`).

## Troubleshooting

### Enable debug logging

To see detailed OpenTelemetry SDK logs, add the following to `config/log4j2.properties`:

```properties
logger.otel.name = io.opentelemetry
logger.otel.level = debug
```

### Common issues

**Connection refused errors**

Verify the endpoint is accessible:
- For gRPC (default): Port 4317
- For HTTP: Port 4318 with `/v1/metrics` path automatically appended

> - If no port is specified, defaults are used: 80 for `http://`, 443 for `https://`

Reviewer 2: I find this confusing.

With http we append `/v1/metrics` unless the endpoint they give us already ends with `/v1/metrics`, so there is no way for them to provide an endpoint that _doesn't_ end with `/v1/metrics`. I added a suggestion elsewhere to only set the path to `/v1/metrics` if the endpoint doesn't include a path component, which should resolve this from a usage standpoint.

We also are unclear about the port. We say port 4318 is appended, but also that the defaults are 80/443 depending on the endpoint's protocol.

Author: [The spec](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/protocol/exporter/#endpoint-urls-for-otlphttp) says that any endpoint accepting metrics via otlp must end with `/v1/metrics`. So I don't think there is a valid scenario in which metrics should be sent to an endpoint _not_ ending in `/v1/metrics`.

But now that I'm reading the spec again, it says that the signal-specific endpoint should be used as-is. We only support the `otel.exporter.otlp.metrics.endpoint` setting, which is signal-specific. So according to the spec, it shouldn't be modified with the addition of `/v1/metrics`.

My only concern is that the motel endpoint is specified without a signal-specific path so users will have to read documentation to know that `/v1/metrics` should be appended and I bet many will miss doing that.

Another approach would be to change the setting to the generic `otel.exporter.otlp.endpoint` and then always append `/v1/metrics` given what I mentioned in the first paragraph.

Author: Update on this:

I've changed all the config options to be generic and not signal-specific. So now the setting for the endpoint is `otel.otlp.exporter.endpoint`, which should not include any paths.
The `OtelMetricsService` class will normalize the endpoint for the http protocol and add the `/v1/metrics` path, if it's not there.

---
mapped_pages:

>   - https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/monitoring-with-opentelemetry.html

Reviewer 3: I guess this was added for parallel with others, but it's not necessary here, especially since it's a new feature with no equivalent for old versions.

Author: resolved in 3692581404e3e4ff64e8f4590101291dd132f1f7

applies_to:

>   stack: preview

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
applies_to:
  stack: preview 9.5.0+
  serverless: preview
```

---

# Monitoring Logstash with OpenTelemetry

> Logstash can export metrics to any OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) compatible backend, enabling integration with observability platforms like Elastic, Prometheus, etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Logstash can export metrics to any OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) compatible backend, like Elastic, Prometheus, and others.
```

## Overview

> The OpenTelemetry metrics exporter sends Logstash runtime metrics directly via OTLP (OpenTelemetry Protocol). This provides a standardized way to collect and export metrics without requiring an intermediate collector, though you can also route metrics through an OpenTelemetry Collector if needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry metrics exporter sends Logstash runtime metrics directly using the OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP). This provides a standardized way to collect and export metrics without requiring an intermediate collector, though you can also route metrics through an OpenTelemetry Collector if needed.
```

## Configuration

To enable OpenTelemetry metrics export, add the following settings to your `logstash.yml` file:

```yaml
otel.metrics.enabled: true
otel.exporter.otlp.endpoint: "http://localhost:4317"
otel.metric.export.interval: "10s"
otel.exporter.otlp.protocol: "grpc"
```

### Settings

| Setting | Description | Default |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `otel.metrics.enabled` | Enable or disable OpenTelemetry metrics export. | `false` |

> | `otel.exporter.otlp.endpoint` | OTLP metrics endpoint URL. For gRPC, typically port 4317. For HTTP, typically port 4318. When using HTTP protocol, `/v1/metrics` is automatically appended if not already present, and the default port (80 for `http://`, 443 for `https://`) is added if no port is specified. | `http://localhost:4317` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `otel.exporter.otlp.endpoint` | OTLP metrics endpoint URL. For gRPC, the default port is 4317. For HTTP the default port is 4318. When using the HTTP protocol, `/v1/metrics` is automatically appended if not already present, and the default port (80 for `http://`, 443 for `https://`) is added if no port is specified. | `http://localhost:4317` |
```

> | `otel.metric.export.interval` | Export interval with time unit (e.g., `10s`, `1m`). Controls how frequently metrics are sent to the endpoint. | `"10s"` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `otel.metric.export.interval` | Export interval with time unit. Controls how frequently metrics are sent to the endpoint. For example: `10s` or `1m`. | `"10s"` |
```

> | `otel.exporter.otlp.protocol` | Protocol to use for OTLP export. Valid values are `grpc` or `http`. | `grpc` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `otel.exporter.otlp.protocol` | Protocol to use for OTLP export. Valid values are `grpc` and `http`. | `grpc` |
```

| `otel.exporter.otlp.headers` | HTTP headers as comma-separated `key=value` pairs to include in every OTLP request. Example: `Authorization=ApiKey xxx` or `Authorization=Bearer xxx,X-Custom=foo`. | *N/A* |
| `otel.resource.attributes` | Additional resource attributes as comma-separated key=value pairs. Example: `environment=production,cluster=us-west`. | *N/A* |
| `otel.service.name` | Service name for metrics. | `logstash` |
| `otel.dataset` | Value for the `data_stream.dataset` resource attribute. When sending to the Elastic ingest endpoint, `.otel` is automatically appended — the default `logstash` produces `data_stream.dataset: logstash.otel` and index `metrics-logstash.otel-<namespace>`. This setting is only configurable via `logstash.yml` and has no corresponding system property. | `logstash` |

> | `otel.exporter.otlp.certificate` | Path to a PEM-encoded trusted CA certificate for verifying the OTLP endpoint's TLS certificate. Required when the endpoint uses a self-signed or private CA. | *N/A* |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `otel.exporter.otlp.certificate` | Path to a PEM-encoded trusted CA certificate for verifying the OTLP endpoint's TLS certificate. Required when the endpoint uses a self-signed or private CA. | Not applicable |
```

Reviewer 3: @estolfo Please replace all instances of N/A with "Not applicable" —- no bold required.

Author: resolved in e74ed4114d52d6008c630d0115cea14940734ee4

| `otel.exporter.otlp.client.key` | Path to a PEM-encoded client private key for mutual TLS (mTLS). Must be set together with `otel.exporter.otlp.client.certificate`. | *N/A* |
| `otel.exporter.otlp.client.certificate` | Path to a PEM-encoded client certificate for mutual TLS (mTLS). Must be set together with `otel.exporter.otlp.client.key`. | *N/A* |

### Configuration precedence

> OpenTelemetry settings can be configured via Java system properties or `logstash.yml`. The resolution order is:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry settings can be configured using Java system properties or by editing the `logstash.yml` file. The resolution order is:
```

> 1. **Java system properties** (highest priority) - e.g., `-Dotel.service.name=my-service`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **Java system properties** (highest priority). For example, `-Dotel.service.name=my-service`
```

2. **logstash.yml** (lowest priority)

> Supported system properties:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Supported system properties and their Logstash setting equivalents:
```

| System Property | logstash.yml Setting |
| --- | --- |
| `otel.service.name` | `otel.service.name` |
| `otel.exporter.otlp.endpoint` | `otel.exporter.otlp.endpoint` |
| `otel.exporter.otlp.protocol` | `otel.exporter.otlp.protocol` |
| `otel.metric.export.interval` | `otel.metric.export.interval` |
| `otel.resource.attributes` | `otel.resource.attributes` |
| `otel.exporter.otlp.headers` | `otel.exporter.otlp.headers` |
| `otel.exporter.otlp.certificate` | `otel.exporter.otlp.certificate` |
| `otel.exporter.otlp.client.key` | `otel.exporter.otlp.client.key` |
| `otel.exporter.otlp.client.certificate` | `otel.exporter.otlp.client.certificate` |

## Sending metrics to Elastic Cloud

> To send metrics directly to Elastic Cloud's native OTLP endpoint:

Reviewer 3: Is this mOTLP? I would recommend using the official name (Managed OTLP Endpoint) and link to `opentelemetry://reference/motlp.md` 

https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/opentelemetry/motlp

1. Get your Elastic Cloud OTLP endpoint from your deployment's APM integration settings
2. Create an API key with appropriate permissions

> 3. Configure Logstash:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Get your Elastic Cloud OTLP endpoint from your deployment's APM integration settings.
2. Create an API key with appropriate permissions.
3. Configure Logstash:
```

| `logstash.jvm.mem.heap.used_percent` | Gauge | `%` | Heap memory used as a percentage of max |
| `logstash.jvm.mem.non_heap.used` | Gauge | `By` | Non-heap memory currently used |
| `logstash.jvm.mem.non_heap.committed` | Gauge | `By` | Non-heap memory committed to the JVM |
| `logstash.jvm.gc.collection_count` | Counter | `{collection}` | Number of GC collections. Includes a `gc.generation` attribute (`young` or `old`). |
| `logstash.jvm.gc.collection_time` | Counter | `ms` | Total time spent in GC. Includes a `gc.generation` attribute (`young` or `old`). |
| `logstash.jvm.threads.count` | Gauge | `{thread}` | Current number of JVM threads |
| `logstash.jvm.threads.peak_count` | Gauge | `{thread}` | Peak number of JVM threads since start |
| `logstash.jvm.process.open_file_descriptors` | Gauge | `{file_descriptor}` | Number of open file descriptors |
| `logstash.jvm.process.max_file_descriptors` | Gauge | `{file_descriptor}` | Maximum number of file descriptors |
| `logstash.jvm.process.cpu.percent` | Gauge | `%` | Process CPU usage |
| `logstash.jvm.process.cpu.total` | Counter | `ms` | Total CPU time consumed by the process |

### Cgroup metrics (Linux only)

> These metrics are available when running on Linux with cgroups enabled (e.g., in containers).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These metrics are available when running on Linux with cgroups enabled, for example in containers.
```

| `logstash.os.cgroup.cpu.stat.nr_times_throttled` | Counter | `{occurrence}` | Number of times throttled |
| `logstash.os.cgroup.cpu.stat.time_throttled` | Counter | `ns` | Total time throttled |

## Resource attributes

The following resource attributes are automatically added to all metrics:

| Attribute | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `service.name` | Defaults to `logstash`; configurable via `otel.service.name` |
| `service.instance.id` | The Logstash node ID |
| `host.name` | The Logstash node name (`node.name`) |
| `data_stream.dataset` | Set to the value of `otel.dataset` (default `logstash`); the Elastic ingest endpoint appends `.otel`, resulting in `logstash.otel` |

Additional resource attributes can be added using the `otel.resource.attributes` setting.

## Viewing metrics in Kibana

When sending metrics to Elastic Cloud via the native OTLP endpoint, metrics are stored in APM data streams (`.ds-metrics-apm.app.logstash-*`). You can view them in:

1. **Observability > APM > Services** - Find your Logstash service
2. **Observability > Metrics Explorer** - Query metrics directly

> 3. **Discover** - Search the `metrics-apm.app.logstash-*` data view

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Find your Logstash service under **Observability → APM → Services**.
2. Query metrics directly in **Observability → Metrics Explorer**.
3. Search the `metrics-apm.app.logstash-*` data view using **Discover**.
```

> When using an OpenTelemetry Collector with the Elasticsearch exporter, create a data view matching your configured index pattern (e.g., `metrics-otel-*`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When using an OpenTelemetry Collector with the Elasticsearch exporter, create a data view matching your configured index pattern. For example, `metrics-otel-*`.
```
